website/blog/2018-12-12-fast-goto-definition.md, before:

---
author: Ólafur Páll Geirsson
title: Fast goto definition with low memory footprint
authorURL: https://twitter.com/olafurpg
authorImageURL: https://avatars2.githubusercontent.com/u/1408093?s=460&v=4
---

Metals throws away its navigation index when it shuts down. Next time it starts,
the index is computed again from scratch. Although this approach is simple, it
requires indexing to be fast enough so you don't mind running it again and
again. Also, because we don't persist the index to disk, we need to be careful
with memory usage.

This post covers how Metals achieves fast source indexing for Scala with a small
memory footprint. We describe the problem statement, explain the initial
solution and how an optimization delivered a 10x speedup. Finally, we evaluate
the result on a real-world project.

<!-- truncate -->

The work presented in this post was done as part of my job at the
[Scala Center](https://scala.epfl.ch/).

<style>
blockquote {
  background-color: rgba(100, 205, 255, 0.3);
  border-left: 8px solid #64cdff;
}
</style>

## Problem statement

What happens when you run Goto Definition? In reality, a lot goes on but in this
post we're gonna focus on a specific problem: given a method like
`scala.Some.isEmpty` and many thousand source files with millions of lines of
code, how do we quickly find the source file that defines that method?

![goto-definition](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1408093/49591684-67070700-f96f-11e8-873d-90c40480528b.gif)

There are some hard constraints:

- we must answer quickly, normal requests should respond within 100-200ms.
- memory usage should not exceed 10-100Mb since we also need memory to implement
  other features and we're sharing the computer with other applications.
- computing an index should not take more than ~10 seconds after importing the
  build, even for large projects with millions of lines of source code
  (including dependencies).

To keep things simple, imagine we have all source files available in a directory
that we can walk and read.

```scala
walk()
// Stream("scala/Option.scala", "scala/Predef.scala", ...)

read("scala/Option.scala")
// "sealed abstract class Option { ... }; class Some extends Option { ... }"
```

### Java

For Java, the challenge is not so difficult since the compiler enforces that
each source file contains a single public class with matching filename.

```java
// java/nio/file/Files.java
package java.nio.file;
public class Files {
    public static byte[] readAllBytes(path: Path) {
      // ...
    }
}
```

To respond to a Goto Definition request for the `Files.readAllBytes()` method,
we

- take the enclosing toplevel class `java.nio.file.Files`
- read the corresponding file `java/nio/File/Files.java`
- parse `Files.java` to find the exact position of `readAllFiles()`

This approach is fast (parsing one file is cheap) and it also requires no index
(0Mb memory!).

### Scala

For Scala, the problem is trickier because the compiler allows multiple toplevel
classes in the same source file.

```scala
// scala/Option.scala
package scala
sealed abstract class Option[+T] { /* ... */ }
final class Some[+T](value: T) extends Option[T] {
  def isEmpty = false
  // ...
}
```

To navigate to the `scala.Some.isEmpty` method we can't use the same approach as
in Java because the class `scala.Some` is in `scala/Option.scala`, not
`scala/Some.scala`.

One possible solution is to read the `scala/Some.class` classfile that contains
the filename `Option.scala` where `scala.Some` is defined.

```sh
$ javap -classpath $(coursier fetch org.scala-lang:scala-library:2.12.8) scala.Some
Compiled from "Option.scala"
...
```

However, source information in classfiles is not always reliable and it may be
removed by tools that process jar files. Let's restrict the problem to only use
source files.

Instead of using JVM classfiles, we can walk all Scala source files and build an
index that maps toplevel classes to the source file that defines that class. The
index looks something like this:

```scala
val index = Map[Symbol, Path](
  Symbol("scala.Some") -> Path("scala/Option.scala"),
  // ...
)
```

With this index, we can lookup which file defines `scala.Some` and then parse
`Option.scala` on-demand (like we do for Java) to find the position where
`def isEmpty: Boolean` is defined. The challenge is to efficiently build the
index.

## Initial solution

One approach to build the index is to use the
[Scalameta](https://scalameta.org/) parser to extract the toplevel classes of
each source file. This parser does not desugar the original code making it
useful for refactoring and code-formatting tools like
[Scalafix](http://scalacenter.github.io/scalafix/)/[Scalafmt](http://scalameta.org/scalafmt).
I'm also familiar with Scalameta parser API so it was fast to get a working
implementation. However, is the parser fast enough to parse millions of lines of
code on every server startup?

According to JMH benchmarks, the Scalameta parser handles ~92k lines/second
measured against a sizable corpus of Scala code. The benchmarks use the
"single-shot" mode of JMH, for which the documentation says:

> "This mode is useful to estimate the "cold" performance when you don't want to
> hide the warmup invocations."

Cold performance is an OK estimate for our use-case since indexing happens
during server startup.

The Scala standard library is ~36k lines so at 92k lines/second this solution
scales up to a codebase with up to 20-30 similarly-sized library dependencies.
If we add more library dependencies, we exceed the 10 second constraint for
indexing time. For a codebase with 5 million lines of code, users might have to
wait one minute for indexing to complete. We should aim for better.

## Optimized solution

We can speed up indexing by writing a custom parser that extracts only the
information we need from a source file. For example, the Scalameta parser
extracts method implementations that are irrelevant for our indexer. Our indexer
needs to know the toplevel classes and nothing more.

The simplified algorithm for this custom parser goes something like this:

- tokenize source file
- on consecutive `package object` keywords, record package object
- on `package` keyword, record package name
- on `class` and `trait` and `object` keywords, record toplevel class
- on `(` and `[` and `{` delimiters, skip tokens until we find matching closing
  delimiter

There are a few more cases to handle, but the implementation ended up being ~200
lines of code that took an afternoon to write and test (less time than it took
to write this blog post!).

Benchmarks show that the custom parser is almost 10x faster compared to the
initial solution.

```text
[info] Benchmark                  Mode  Cnt  Score   Error  Units
[info] MetalsBench.toplevelParse    ss   30  0.349 ± 0.003   s/op
[info] MetalsBench.scalametaParse   ss   30  3.370 ± 0.175   s/op
```

At ~920k lines/second it takes ~6 seconds to index a codebase with 5 million
lines of code, a noticeable improvement to the user experience compared to the
one minute it took with the previous solution.

## Evaluation

Micro-benchmarks are helpful but they don't always reflect user experience. To
evaluate how our indexer performs in the real world, we test Metals on the
[Prisma](https://www.prisma.io/) codebase. Prisma is a server implemented in
Scala that replaces traditional ORMs and data access layers with a universal
database abstraction.

<img width="998" alt="prisma" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1408093/49875321-08cf9d80-fe21-11e8-9f02-54ff4960a7af.png">

The project has around 80k lines of Scala code.

```sh
$ git clone https://github.com/prisma/prisma.git
$ cd prisma/server
$ loc
Language             Files        Lines        Blank      Comment         Code
Scala                  673        88730        12811         1812        74107
```

We open VS Code with the Metals extension, enable the server property
`-Dmetals.statistics=all` and import the build.

```sh
$ tail -f .metals/metals.log
time: ran 'sbt bloopInstall' in 1m4s
time: imported workspace in 13s
memory: index using 13.1M (923,085 lines Scala)
```

We run "Import build" again to get a second measurement.

```sh
time: ran 'sbt bloopInstall' in 41s
time: imported workspace in 7s
memory: index using 13.1M (990,144 Scala)
```

- **"ran 'sbt bloopInstall'"**: the time it takes to dump the sbt build
  structure with [Bloop](https://scalacenter.github.io/bloop/), the build server
  used by Metals.
  - The Prisma build has 44 sbt projects.
  - Running `sbt` takes 23 seconds to reach the sbt shell.
- **"imported workspace"**: the time it takes to import the build structure into
  Metals and index sources of all projects, including the following steps:
  1. Query Bloop for the dumped build structure, listing all project
     dependencies, sources and compiler options.
  2. Walk, read and index all Scala sources in the workspace, happens in both
     runs.
  3. Walk, read and index all library dependency sources, happens only for the
     first run since the indexer caches `*-sources.jar` file results.
  - It's expected that "lines of code" increased by ~70k lines in the second run
    since we indexed the workspace sources again.
  - It's expected that indexing was faster in the second run since indexes are
    cached for `*-sources.jar` files and the JVM has also warmed up.
- **"index using 13.1M"**: the memory footprint of the index mapping toplevel
  Scala classes to which file they are defined in.
  - Memory is measured using
    [OpenJDK JOL](https://openjdk.java.net/projects/code-tools/jol/)
    `GraphLayout.totalSize()`.
  - Note that the server uses more memory in total, this is only for the
    navigation index.
  - The index does not contain entries where the toplevel classname matches the
    filename, for the same reason we don't index Java sources.

On average, Goto Definition responds well within our 100ms goal.

```text
time: definition in 0.03s
time: definition in 0.02s
```

However, occasional definition requests take much longer to respond.

```text
info  time: definition in 8s
info  time: definition in 0.62s
```

The outliers happen when navigating inside library dependency sources, which is
expected to be slower since we need to type-check those sources before querying
the index.

## Conclusion

Metals uses a custom Scala parser to index sources at roughly 1 million
lines/second in micro-benchmarks. The index is used to quickly respond to Goto
Definition requests. On a case-study project containing 44 modules and ~900k
lines of Scala sources (including library dependencies), it takes ~10 seconds to
import the build structure (including source indexing) and the resulting index
uses 13M memory.

The Java+Scala source indexers used by Metals are available in a standalone
library called mtags.

```scala
libraryDependecies += "org.scalameta" %% "mtags" % "0.3.1"
```

The mtags library is already being used by the
[Almond Scala kernel for Jupyter](http://almond-sh.github.io/almond/stable/docs/intro)
to support Goto Definition inside Jupyter notebooks.

Can the indexer become faster? Sure, I suspect there's still room for 2-3x
speedups with further optimizations. However, I'm not convinced it will make a
significant improvement to the user experience since we remain bottle-necked by
dumping sbt build structure and compiling the sources.

Try out Goto Definition with Metals today using VS Code, Atom, Vim, Sublime Text
or Emacs using the installation instructions here:
https://scalameta.org/metals/docs/editors/overview.html.

Commit message:

Minor blog post polish
- use bullet list for Scala, same as for Java
- show "Importing build" gif at the end of the post

website/blog/2018-12-12-fast-goto-definition.md, after:

---
author: Ólafur Páll Geirsson
title: Fast goto definition with low memory footprint
authorURL: https://twitter.com/olafurpg
authorImageURL: https://avatars2.githubusercontent.com/u/1408093?s=460&v=4
---

Metals throws away its navigation index when it shuts down. Next time it starts,
the index is computed again from scratch. Although this approach is simple, it
requires indexing to be fast enough so you don't mind running it again and
again. Also, because we don't persist the index to disk, we need to be careful
with memory usage.

This post covers how Metals achieves fast source indexing for Scala with a small
memory footprint. We describe the problem statement, explain the initial
solution and how an optimization delivered a 10x speedup. Finally, we evaluate
the result on a real-world project.

<!-- truncate -->

The work presented in this post was done as part of my job at the
[Scala Center](https://scala.epfl.ch/).

<style>
blockquote {
  background-color: rgba(100, 205, 255, 0.3);
  border-left: 8px solid #64cdff;
}
</style>

## Problem statement

What happens when you run Goto Definition? In reality, a lot goes on but in this
post we're gonna focus on a specific problem: given a method like
`scala.Some.isEmpty` and many thousand source files with millions of lines of
code, how do we quickly find the source file that defines that method?

![goto-definition](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1408093/49591684-67070700-f96f-11e8-873d-90c40480528b.gif)

There are some hard constraints:

- we must answer quickly, normal requests should respond within 100-200ms.
- memory usage should not exceed 10-100Mb since we also need memory to implement
  other features and we're sharing the computer with other applications.
- computing an index should not take more than ~10 seconds after importing the
  build, even for large projects with millions of lines of source code
  (including dependencies).

To keep things simple, imagine we have all source files available in a directory
that we can walk and read.

```scala
walk()
// Stream("scala/Option.scala", "scala/Predef.scala", ...)

read("scala/Option.scala")
// "sealed abstract class Option { ... }; class Some extends Option { ... }"
```

### Java

For Java, the challenge is not so difficult since the compiler enforces that
each source file contains a single public class with matching filename.

```java
// java/nio/file/Files.java
package java.nio.file;
public class Files {
    public static byte[] readAllBytes(path: Path) {
      // ...
    }
}
```

To respond to a Goto Definition request for the `Files.readAllBytes` method, we

- take the enclosing toplevel class `java.nio.file.Files`
- read the corresponding file `java/nio/File/Files.java`
- parse `Files.java` to find the exact position of `readAllBytes`

This approach is fast (parsing one file is cheap) and it also requires no index
(0Mb memory!).

### Scala

For Scala, the problem is trickier because the compiler allows multiple toplevel
classes in the same source file.

```scala
// scala/Option.scala
package scala
sealed abstract class Option[+T] { /* ... */ }
final class Some[+T](value: T) extends Option[T] {
  def isEmpty = false
  // ...
}
```

To navigate to the `scala.Some.isEmpty` method we can't use the same approach as
in Java because the class `scala.Some` is in `scala/Option.scala`, not
`scala/Some.scala`.

One possible solution is to read the `scala/Some.class` classfile that contains
the filename `Option.scala` where `scala.Some` is defined.

```sh
$ javap -classpath $(coursier fetch org.scala-lang:scala-library:2.12.8) scala.Some
Compiled from "Option.scala"
...
```

However, source information in classfiles is not always reliable and it may be
removed by tools that process jar files. Let's restrict the problem to only use
source files.

Instead of using JVM classfiles, we can walk all Scala source files and build an
index that maps toplevel classes to the source file that defines that class. The
index looks something like this:

```scala
val index = Map[Symbol, Path](
  Symbol("scala.Some") -> Path("scala/Option.scala"),
  // ...
)
```

With this index, we find the definition of `Some.isEmpty` using the same steps
as for `Files.readAllBytes` in Java:

- take the enclosing toplevel class `scala.Some`
- query index to know that `scala.Some` is defined in `scala/Option.scala`
- parse `scala/Option.scala` to find exact position of `isEmpty` method.

The challenge is to efficiently build the index.

## Initial solution

One approach to build the index is to use the
[Scalameta](https://scalameta.org/) parser to extract the toplevel classes of
each source file. This parser does not desugar the original code making it
useful for refactoring and code-formatting tools like
[Scalafix](http://scalacenter.github.io/scalafix/)/[Scalafmt](http://scalameta.org/scalafmt).
I'm also familiar with Scalameta parser API so it was fast to get a working
implementation. However, is the parser fast enough to parse millions of lines of
code on every server startup?

According to JMH benchmarks, the Scalameta parser handles ~92k lines/second
measured against a sizable corpus of Scala code. The benchmarks use the
"single-shot" mode of JMH, for which the documentation says:

> "This mode is useful to estimate the "cold" performance when you don't want to
> hide the warmup invocations."

Cold performance is an OK estimate for our use-case since indexing happens
during server startup.

The Scala standard library is ~36k lines so at 92k lines/second this solution
scales up to a codebase with up to 20-30 similarly-sized library dependencies.
If we add more library dependencies, we exceed the 10 second constraint for
indexing time. For a codebase with 5 million lines of code, users might have to
wait one minute for indexing to complete. We should aim for better.

## Optimized solution

We can speed up indexing by writing a custom parser that extracts only the
information we need from a source file. For example, the Scalameta parser
extracts method implementations that are irrelevant for our indexer. Our indexer
needs to know the toplevel classes and nothing more.

The simplified algorithm for this custom parser goes something like this:

- tokenize source file
- on consecutive `package object` keywords, record package object
- on `package` keyword, record package name
- on `class` and `trait` and `object` keywords, record toplevel class
- on `(` and `[` and `{` delimiters, skip tokens until we find matching closing
  delimiter

There are a few more cases to handle, but the implementation ended up being ~200
lines of code that took an afternoon to write and test (less time than it took
to write this blog post!).

Benchmarks show that the custom parser is almost 10x faster compared to the
initial solution.

```text
[info] Benchmark                  Mode  Cnt  Score   Error  Units
[info] MetalsBench.toplevelParse    ss   30  0.349 ± 0.003   s/op
[info] MetalsBench.scalametaParse   ss   30  3.370 ± 0.175   s/op
```

At ~920k lines/second it takes ~6 seconds to index a codebase with 5 million
lines of code, a noticeable improvement to the user experience compared to the
one minute it took with the previous solution.

## Evaluation

Micro-benchmarks are helpful but they don't always reflect user experience. To
evaluate how our indexer performs in the real world, we test Metals on the
[Prisma](https://www.prisma.io/) codebase. Prisma is a server implemented in
Scala that replaces traditional ORMs and data access layers with a universal
database abstraction.

<img width="998" alt="prisma" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1408093/49875321-08cf9d80-fe21-11e8-9f02-54ff4960a7af.png">

The project has around 80k lines of Scala code.

```sh
$ git clone https://github.com/prisma/prisma.git
$ cd prisma/server
$ loc
Language             Files        Lines        Blank      Comment         Code
Scala                  673        88730        12811         1812        74107
```

We open VS Code with the Metals extension, enable the server property
`-Dmetals.statistics=all` and import the build.

```sh
$ tail -f .metals/metals.log
time: ran 'sbt bloopInstall' in 1m4s
time: imported workspace in 13s
memory: index using 13.1M (923,085 lines Scala)
```

We run "Import build" again to get a second measurement.

```sh
time: ran 'sbt bloopInstall' in 41s
time: imported workspace in 7s
memory: index using 13.1M (990,144 Scala)
```

- **"ran 'sbt bloopInstall'"**: the time it takes to dump the sbt build
  structure with [Bloop](https://scalacenter.github.io/bloop/), the build server
  used by Metals.
  - The Prisma build has 44 sbt projects.
  - Running `sbt` takes 23 seconds to reach the sbt shell.
- **"imported workspace"**: the time it takes to import the build structure into
  Metals and index sources of all projects, including the following steps:
  1. Query Bloop for the dumped build structure, listing all project
     dependencies, sources and compiler options.
  2. Walk, read and index all Scala sources in the workspace, happens in both
     runs.
  3. Walk, read and index all library dependency sources, happens only for the
     first run since the indexer caches `*-sources.jar` file results.
  - It's expected that "lines of code" increased by ~70k lines in the second run
    since we indexed the workspace sources again.
  - It's expected that indexing was faster in the second run since indexes are
    cached for `*-sources.jar` files and the JVM has also warmed up.
- **"index using 13.1M"**: the memory footprint of the index mapping toplevel
  Scala classes to which file they are defined in.
  - Memory is measured using
    [OpenJDK JOL](https://openjdk.java.net/projects/code-tools/jol/)
    `GraphLayout.totalSize()`.
  - Note that the server uses more memory in total, this is only for the
    navigation index.
  - The index does not contain entries where the toplevel classname matches the
    filename, for the same reason we don't index Java sources.

On average, Goto Definition responds well within our 100ms goal.

```text
time: definition in 0.03s
time: definition in 0.02s
```

However, occasional definition requests take much longer to respond.

```text
info  time: definition in 8s
info  time: definition in 0.62s
```

The outliers happen when navigating inside library dependency sources, which is
expected to be slower since we need to type-check those sources before querying
the index.

## Conclusion

Metals uses a custom Scala parser to index sources at roughly 1 million
lines/second in micro-benchmarks. The index is used to quickly respond to Goto
Definition requests. On a case-study project containing 44 modules and ~900k
lines of Scala sources (including library dependencies), it takes ~10 seconds to
import the build structure (including source indexing) and the resulting index
uses 13M memory.

The Java+Scala source indexers used by Metals are available in a standalone
library called mtags.

```scala
libraryDependecies += "org.scalameta" %% "mtags" % "0.3.1"
```

The mtags library is already being used by the
[Almond Scala kernel for Jupyter](http://almond-sh.github.io/almond/stable/docs/intro)
to support Goto Definition inside Jupyter notebooks.

Can the indexer become faster? Sure, I suspect there's still room for 2-3x
speedups with further optimizations. However, I'm not convinced it will make a
significant improvement to the user experience since we remain bottle-necked by
dumping sbt build structure and compiling the sources.

Try out Goto Definition with Metals today using VS Code, Atom, Vim, Sublime Text
or Emacs using the installation instructions here:
https://scalameta.org/metals/docs/editors/overview.html. The indexer is working
when you see "Importing build" in the status bar
![imageedit_3_3576623823](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1408093/49924982-f5234600-feb7-11e8-9edd-715388bb546f.gif)
