docs/build-tools/bloop.md, before:

---
id: bloop
title: Bloop
---

[Bloop](https://scalacenter.github.io/bloop/docs/installation/#sbt) is a compile
server for Scala that works with sbt and has experimental support for other
build tools like Maven, Gradle and Mill. If your workspace contains a `.bloop/`
directory with Bloop JSON files then Metals will automatically connect to it.

To manually tell Metals to connect with Bloop, run the "Connect to build server"
(id: `build.connect`) command. In VS Code, open the the "Command palette"
(`Cmd + Shift + P`) and search "connect to build server".

![Import connect to build server command](assets/vscode-connect-build-server.png)

## Speeding up build connection

Metals requires Bloop v1.1.0+. If you have a compatible version of Bloop
installed on your machine then Metals will connect to that server instance,
which is great for performance.

However, if you don't have Bloop installed on your machine or the installed
version is outdated then Metals will download a new Bloop server and instantiate
it through classloading. This download+classload step may take a while when
starting a new Metals server. By installing Bloop v1.1+ on your machine you can
speed up the build connection step.

Commit message:

Prepare for v0.3.0 release
Minor docs updates and upgrade dependencies

docs/build-tools/bloop.md, after:

---
id: bloop
title: Bloop
---

[Bloop](https://scalacenter.github.io/bloop) is a compile server for Scala that
works with sbt and has experimental support for other build tools like Maven,
Gradle and Mill. If your workspace contains a `.bloop/` directory with Bloop
JSON files then Metals will automatically connect to it.

To manually tell Metals to connect with Bloop, run the "Connect to build server"
(id: `build.connect`) command. In VS Code, open the the "Command palette"
(`Cmd + Shift + P`) and search "connect to build server".

![Import connect to build server command](assets/vscode-connect-build-server.png)

## Installing Bloop CLI

To compile, test and run from your terminal install the `bloop` command-line
interface with the instructions here: https://scalacenter.github.io/bloop/setup

## Customizing build import

Consult the Bloop docs for customizing build import for sbt:
https://scalacenter.github.io/bloop/docs/build-tools/sbt

- Enable `IntegrationTest` and other custom configurations
- Speed up build import
- Enable sbt project references (source dependencies)
- Export main class
